---
layout: post
title: "Analysing Neuroimaging Data"
date: 2024-10-10
categories: projects
---

**Description**: This is a project I am working on to connect outcomes to brain CT scans. It is still in the data labelling phase. I have understood more about biomedical imaging formats, the challenges of training and recruiting raters, and segmentation algorithms. 

The dataset is a Singaporean dataset that is quite big compared to what has been used in literature. This makes it interesting for analysis. However, the main challenges have been in obtaining and labelling the data.

***On CT scans***: CT scans are not "truly" 3D unlike an MRI (though this could be due how we obtained the dataset). They are high resolution in plane, and low resolution out of plane, and there are 3 sets of photos for each plane. There is no good method for combining them, and therefore they cannot be represented as voxel cubes. When segmenting them, they are done only in the axial plane; but radiologists see a CT scan in all 3 planes with the help of a crosshair linked across all 3 perspectives. This makes segmentation inaccurate as it isn't done the way a human would do it. 

As far as I know, no good software exists that is 1) easy to use, 2) made for biomedical imaging, and 3) can show all 3 planes. Commercial segmentation platforms that help to distribute it to raters in a slick google-drive esque platform can do 1) and 2), but can only show the axial plane. We decided to use Slicer 3D, and open source biomedical imaging software with a large extension library. But it is difficult to use and makes onboarding very time consuming.

***On file formats***: Segmentation and other manipulation uses the NIFTI file format instead of the DICOM format the scans came in. However, the NIFTI format was initially made for MRIs and are not very reliable for CT scans. Scripts had to be created to deal with the large number of conversion failures.


***On semi-automated segmentation***: Meta's segment anything model is very amazing at segmenting the high-contrast hematoma (bleed), as the white stands out against the gray background of normal brain. However, getting raters to use it was practically impossible despite there being an extension for it, as it required an NVIDIA gpu, or a remote connection to institution servers with a GUI.

We decided on more traditional segmentation tools like watershed and flood filling algorithms. It was very interesting to learn more about them.

The Slicer 3D plugin [MONAIAuto3DSeg](https://github.com/lassoan/SlicerMONAIAuto3DSeg) is also very interesting. It includes many pre-trained models contributed by others, with clear requirements for maximum computation times, and close to plug-and-play for the end user. I learnt that medical segmentation models mainly use UNets, and that some of these models in the model zoo are very accurate and reliable, while some are very inaccurate and basically useless - you'd rather draw it yourself. 